Welcome back everyone, and thanks for joining us.
Good morning, Mike. Uh, we've got Richard, uh,
ley here from Engineering New Zealand,
who is our next submitter.
Thank you, uh, for your patience, Richard.
And, uh, we've got a copy
of your written submission already,
and 10 minutes to hear from you this morning. Over to you.
Apologies, I'll just get rid of the, uh, background image.
There we go.
Perfect. We can now.
So kilda, I'm Richard Temp.
I'm the Chief Executive of Hoe Engineering
New Zealand. And with me is,
Ah, hi, I'm Tanya Williams,
and I'm the Chief engineer here at Engineering New Zealand
and the general manager for membership.
Um, my name's Paul Campbell.
Um, I work for a firm called WSP.
I'm the leader of the, um, building structures
and an engineer in New Zealand.
Member,
Uh, engineering New Zealand has 23,000, uh, members,
and we represent the entire engineering profession.
We also regulate the profession.
We ha do that under the Chartered
Professional Engineers Act.
Uh, and we accredit all tertiary, uh, train training
for the profession, so both at
Polytechnics and universities.
So thank you very much for the chance to present.
Um, we support the overall intent
of the emergency management bill.
Number two, to clarify roles lift national consistency
and ensure the right powers and protections are available
before, during, and after emergencies.
The key things we would like to highlight
for the committee are the critical role
of engineers in emergency management
and our desire to ensure this is protected
and recognized in the system.
The bills focus on response
and recovery rather than reduction in readiness
and the definitions of critical infrastructure.
Hello. So I'm gonna talk, uh,
specifically about the engineers critical role.
Uh, it is absolutely critical
that engineers are involved in both the reduction
and readiness phases of emergency management, as well
as the response and recovery phases
through the emergency management committees.
Uh, the things that we would ask you to consider, uh,
and support, uh, the inclusion of guidelines
and rules around clause 2 0 2.
Now, this is the clause, uh,
about the civil liability protections
and to clarify, uh, not just for engineers,
but other professionals, uh,
when they're acting under acting under direction.
So it is really important to us, uh,
with rapid building assessments
and with other critical functions that engineers perform,
especially in the media aftermath
and an event that they are covered by
that civil liability protection very clearly.
The other bit that we'd like there raise, uh,
to the committee's attention is the ability
to set up contracts for professionals before events.
Uh, and this is to ensure that in a, when a state
of emergency, whether local
or national is, uh, declared that the terms
and conditions are already agreed, trying to contract
any professionals, uh, in the immediate aftermath just adds
to delay and confusion.
We want things to be as predictable, uh,
and lack of surprise in things as we can, which moves,
uh, me on to the next parts that we wanted to focus on,
which is all about the response and recovery.
So the bill does strengthen the response
and short-term recovery, but readiness is,
and those two points that I made
before is what we are recommending.
We really feel, um, that it's important that we put time in
before the events, which are inevitable now.
And in that, um, we embed the,
the readiness deliverables in the regional planning
standards and in the national plans
that will require transparent reporting on readiness for,
uh, you know, the local authorities and all the agencies
and into the national strategy.
And we embed pre-event arrangements so
that we can mobilize faster and faster fearer
and more consistently in events.
So it's, uh, less surprise, as I say, uh,
often cited as a rule of thumb that
for every dollar you spend, uh, in readiness, uh,
that saved, avoids losing, uh,
$4 after the event.
And I truly have seen that in practice.
And we just feel that the lack of focus on readiness,
uh, limits, you know,
that the bill will not achieve all the outcomes
that you want to out as outlined under clause three.
Um, as part of the readiness, we think that some
of the definitions of critical infrastructure you should,
um, review and consider.
Um, it's our very firm belief that those, um,
critical infrastructure items that are needed to just
maintain operational continuity throughout the event, um,
need to be, um, more specifically addressed.
And specifically there's a concern
that hospitals aren't on the list.
It's our strong recommendation.
They should remain on the list.
Um, as we face more and more with the events
because of climate change, et cetera, we think that, um,
flood protections, stock banks, dams, things like that need
to have, um, more prominence in the, um, plans.
Um, there's always issues around, um, finance
and, um, payments, post events.
Sometimes it's as mundane as, you know, if,
if there's a big earthquake or something actually physically
being able to get cash and things like that.
So we think that that needs to be considered.
Um, unfortunately these vents create a lot of waste.
Um, you know, um, earthquakes, et cetera, we need to get rid
of things, um, stock banks slash um, debris, et cetera.
So we need to be a bit more consideration.
We believe in terms of where solid waste is gonna go.
Um, critical private road networks also, um,
we think need a little bit more consideration.
Um, and non council, um, drinking water supplies.
Um, currently with all of these flooding events,
there's a lot of water supplies that are, um, interrupted
that are not council owned.
Um, be they private bores, whatever.
Um, and whilst it's a little bit grim, um,
mortuaries and, um, forensic pathology, um,
you know, we've traditionally relied on, um,
the Army c Upfield hospitals and things like that,
but we believe that there could be some more, um,
preparedness, um, done in that.
Um, and a lot of these events, we think, um,
traditionally the civil defense emergencies
have been on big catastrophic things, but as we see more
and more flood type events, we believe that there needs
to be a little bit more emphasis in that space.
Thank you so much. Is, is that now,
Now a chance for you to ask us any
Questions? Fantastic. I, I
can see some questions from members.
I'll start with Melissa Lee. Thank you.
Unmute. Might be helpful. Thank you so much.
Uh, I'm just wanting to, um, dig into that, um, cost
that you actually talked about a dollar spent, um,
for preparations worth $4 after.
Could you actually elaborate a little bit on that in terms
of real experience?
Yeah, look, um, things like
if stock banks are maintained
or we, um, make them a little bit higher, for example,
in a flooding event, and we don't actually breach the stock
bank and flood, you know, the,
the cost benefit is just enormous.
Um, if, um, what's another example?
I mean, there's been a lot of, um, noise around, um, slash
but you know, when we've got debris flows,
taking out bridges
and things like that, if we can avoid that happening
to start with, um, the cost benefit is huge.
So really in the preparedness space, it's about
what can we do to mitigate the extent
of damage after the fact?
I mean, we can never, um, totally get rid of
what mother nature is gonna throw at us,
but we can be better prepared and reduce the damage.
And by reducing the damage, um, we get communities back
and thriving again sooner.
Um, and it's really hard to put dollar figures on that,
but you know, it, it's,
the sooner you get the community functioning again, um,
the better off everybody is.
And that starts with
how can we reduce the impact of the event
Supplementary on that supplementary.
Yep. Um, supplementary on that question, in terms
of the two examples that you've actually given,
whose responsibility do you actually think that is?
You know, one is the stock bank
and the other one is actually the slash
is it the government's responsibility
to be prepared for those?
I'll, I'll field that one.
Uh, having worked in local government, it's a combination
of central and local government responsibilities.
So for a stock bank
that would typically be regional councils for slash
is a combination of regional and district councils.
But of course, councils only ever operate under the mandate
of central government
and follow the advice of central government.
So it's a combination of central and local government.
Thank you. But maybe one final quick question
from Mike Davidson.
Tha thanks and thanks for your submission.
Actually, mine kind of follows on from that is,
and I think a few examples actually kind of answered it
because you talk about the readiness,
but I was looking at, I guess, risk reduction.
Um, and I guess by doing the stock banks, you are,
that you are really talking about the risk reduction side of
Absolutely. Yeah.
Okay. Thanks.
Thank you much. If I were you. So
to give another example is a few clear, um, the built up
of silt and stones
and what have you under bridges on a regular basis,
when you get a flood event,
the bridges typically, uh, stay intact.
Um, the other, just really quickly,
the other one is the actual, um, preparedness
for the immediate aftermath.
Things like maintaining communication, uh, routes, uh,
you know, in smaller communities,
often when the power goes down, the communication is out
and there's no way for that community to, um,
contact emergency services and things.
So there's investment in the infrastructure
that we will need in the immediate aftermath as well
as the infrastructure itself.
Thank you so much. We have now run out of time,
but I'm sure we could continue the discussion with you.
Thank you so much for your written submission
and also for joining us today.
Tanya, Paul, thank you. Thank you,
thank you, thank you so much.
We now have our next submitter here, Marcelo, uh,
representing the New Zealand Animal Law Association.
We've got a copy of your, uh, written submission,
and we've got 10 minutes to hear from you today.
So over to you.
Thank you, Adam. Chair Koto.
Um, it's a, it's a great privilege
and pleasure to present to the committee on behalf
of the New Zealand to Animal Law Association.
I note that, uh, many of the submitters today, um,
if not all, are going to be focused very much on the,
the human side of emergency management
and disaster preparation.
And so it might seem a little bit odd, uh, to focus
for at least 10 minutes upon, uh, animals
and non-human animals.
Um, and, uh, the focus I think is important,
however, uh, simply
because animals are often sort of forgotten within, uh,
disaster and emergency preparation.
Um, and that is no better highlighted than the
current, uh, legislation.
The, the Civil Defense Emergency Management Act 2002 has
four scam references to animals throughout its text, uh,
mostly relating to powers to clean up dead animals, um,
and one very odd provision allowing, um, a controller
or constable to requisition an animal in certain
circumstances, but no provision whatsoever to manage, uh,
animals, uh, or deal with, uh, either livestock
or companion animals in emergency situations.
Um, that's despite their extreme vulnerability, uh,
in any situation.
And animals are some of the most vulnerable, uh,
members of our society.
Uh, and in particularly, uh, acute situations such
as emergencies and disasters, uh,
that vulnerability is increased to a remarkable level.
Uh, when we talk about sort of the, the cost of,
of emergencies
and disasters, uh, certainly when we see humans affected,
that is rightfully, um, and occupies our mind.
But what is often forgotten is that many,
many animals are often sort of harmed and,
and killed in, in, in disaster situations.
And, and we need to have a think about
how we requisition our, make provision for, uh, animals
and such, uh, acute situations, uh, that that's why we're,
we're largely supportive of, of this bill,
because for the first time, uh,
we see clear reference to animals.
Um, and in particular, uh, the requirement
for regional emergency management plans to, uh, provide
for the management of animals is a really welcome addition.
And we, uh, are grateful, uh, to, uh,
the legislative process that is now suddenly
recognizing animals as they should be.
Uh, that says, uh,
you have our written submission in front of you.
I, I do wanna highlight two sort of key points, uh,
in the current bill that we do think, uh,
could be, uh, improved.
Um, and that firstly is the requirement for a, a,
a national, uh, animal, uh, uh, plan.
Presently, we see the ministry
for primary industries provides for sort
of national management and, and,
and planning at, at that level,
but one that only deals with sort of livestock
and doesn't sort of refer to sort of the,
the companion animals that are going to be, um,
acutely affected in such situations.
Uh, and two, that doesn't require sort of national cohesion
and, uh, engagement with regional authorities.
And we think that there could be provision, uh,
for a national plan of that type.
Um, then much more specifically, I, I,
I draw the committee's attention to clauses 129, um,
and 162 of the bill, uh, both which allow for, uh,
powers of entry, um,
but make a very odd distinction requiring, uh, contact
of an animal's owner
before someone can enter a house
to retrieve an animal in a vulnerable situation, uh,
when no requirement is required when human life,
uh, is at stake.
Now, there may be good reason as to why
that distinction is made.
Um, it might be the fact that animals are legally property
and humans are obviously not, and so
therefore you can make a distinction on that basis.
Uh, but we feel that this could actually have quite a
significant effect, uh, namely in a situation
where there is emergency, uh, evacuations required
that the burden of contacting an owner, um,
or trying to attempt to make contact
with an owner is simply too much in a situation
where the time is of the essence.
And so we would, uh, you know, implore the committee
to consider removing the provisos that are included within,
uh, sub clause one, paragraph C of each of clauses 129
and 162, uh,
and essentially treat them in the same way
as vulnerable humans might be in a situation requiring
quick evacuation.
Um, and, uh, e effective response times.
Uh, the, the rest of, uh, points are sort
of made clearly within, um, our submission.
We, we know that the, uh, sort of international equivalence
and, and oddly enough, the United States has been sort
of leading on this making provision for companion animals
and ensuring that the human animal bond is preserved.
But, but overall, just want to reiterate
that we support the inclusion of animals, uh,
for the first time in emergency management legislation.
Uh, and we believe that it could be further improved.
But it's a, it's a good start,
and I welcome the committee's questions.
Thank you so much for your submission,
and I think it's, it's great
to have that highlighted as well.
'cause I think one of the major points that, um, was raised,
as you've noted in your written submission, was the, uh,
the fact that animals weren't sufficiently re
recognized in the last version of the bill.
So I'm pleased to say that you're happy with the additional,
um, requirements.
Uh, and I, I think we'll definitely we'll bring up
that distinction that you raised with, with officials
to kind of get their advice.
But do you have any, um, apart from the kind of property,
uh, distinction is, would there be, do,
do you think there'd be any other objections to, uh,
people being able to enter property just to,
to rescue animals, uh, that you can think of as to why
that might, um, have been drafted in that way?
I, I, I mean, I really do think, um, Madam Chair, that
that distinction, that property extinction is probably what,
uh, is, is, uh, requiring that
because the, the provisions refer to sort of the power
of preserving, of, of entry to preserve human life
or to relief the suffering and the stress of people.
Um, and that, that provision is simply the mitigation, um,
of, uh, unreasonable
or unnecessary pain of the distress of an animal.
Uh, the only distinction that I could possibly see is
because in a situation where one needs
to preserve human life, the, the, the, the requirement
to seek permission to enter a, um, uh,
premises simply shouldn't be there.
Whereas we see sort
of equivalent provisions within the Animal Welfare Act
and general sort of common law provisions that would sort
of require some sort of consent
before removal of animal property is required.
It wouldn't necessarily,
however, make it discordant with the general law
or the general sort of, um, provisions to allow for entry
and emergency circumstances
and the provisions that we see in the Animal Welfare Act,
which does allow sort of emergency, um,
and where there are issues of necessity, uh, to allow
for sort of, uh, uh, engagement of animals in that regard,
regardless of owner consent,
I think is important, um, to note.
Uh, but yeah, the, the, the,
the property distinction is the only one,
the only reason I can think of, and it's not attainable.
One, given the vulnerability of animals in such a situation.
And, and just with the animal welfare, um, point,
so the kind of legislation
that in a non-emergency situation, um,
often we see organizations like SPCA might, um,
intervene when there's, um, hardship.
Um, that's, and when animals are at risk that,
so there isn't something already existing, um, at law
that would allow, uh, those animals to be rescued.
You know, despite the, the issue that you've pointed out
with this, this bill,
It's a very good point that you make.
And presently, the only reason as to why, uh,
the SVCA would have powers of entry in
that situation is if they feel that the, uh,
if there is reasonable belief
for offending under the Animal Welfare Act now in an
emergency situation that wouldn't amount
to an offense under the Animal Welfare Act,
and actually the SBCA wouldn't have powers under the Animal
Welfare Act to intervene in such a situation.
So that's why we sort of, I, I, I'm pleased, uh,
if you could put that to officials as to why
that distinction is made, uh, given the vulnerability of,
of animals in that situation.
The distinction doesn't make a lot of sense.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you so much for that.
That is really good. I think we've got one more minute left.
So I'll go to Mike Davidson. Thank you, Mike. Hang,
Thanks. And, and I just
wanted to follow up on that.
'cause you, you'll probably know like what happens when a,
like a say a dog's in a, in a kept in a car
and overheat is then are public allowed
to actually rescue those dogs.
Now without permission,
The, the public are not.
Um, and sort of, uh, I mean,
because that is offending under the Animal Welfare Act would
allow for sort of the entry, uh, by, uh,
either a police officer or the PCA in that such a situation.
Uh, but again, to emphasize,
because in a, you can imagine a situation of flooding
or an earthquake, there isn't offending, um,
occurring under the Animal Welfare Act in such a situation.
Uh, and as a result that the powers
of entry just wouldn't apply under that legislation, which,
which is why, uh, this legislation would need to be amended.
And it's great that there is a power of entry, as I say,
but it could be aligned with the, the vulnerability
of humans in such a situation.
Thanks. Thank you so much.
Uh, we've run out of time, but really, um, helpful points
that we'll, um, will, we will put to officials.
So thank you so much for joining us today.
Thank you for your time. Take care. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh,
I understand we now have our next submitter, Kate, uh,
thank you so much, uh, for joining us today.
We've got, um, the submission of your organization,
which is, uh, Tuo the volunteer center, uh, so sorry,
volunteer Central, which we've, uh,
had the opportunity to have a look at.
And we've got 10 minutes to hear from you today.
So over to you Kda.
Um, thank you so much for giving us the opportunity
to speak with you, uh, and speak to our submission.
We are submitting on mainly around the role
of volunteers and activation of volunteers in an emergency.
It's well known that, uh, volunteers are the backbone
of a community, particularly when it comes to, uh,
struggling with responses.
Um, but also what's not so much known is there's a lot
of preparation that goes into making sure
that volunteers are ready to respond
and be available during an activation.
Um, uh, we really do support having more engagement
and visibility of local people and committees
and, uh, Maori iwi in, uh, the,
uh, executive committees.
It's, uh, very important that
those groups are involved at the grassroots rather than
just, um, when a response is required.
Uh, the Volunteer Central, as well
as Volunteer Centers Network,
which you would've seen in our submission as a group
of 17 volunteer centers around the Mortal.
We live, work,
and are present
in the communities every day.
We are working with community organizations.
We are working with Iwi, we are working with Pacifica.
We are working with multicultural.
We are working with former refugees.
We are working with disability communities.
We are working with rainbow communities, we are working
with rural communities, and we do it every day.
So we have the systems
and the processes already in place to be able to be ready
and respond and also be part of recovery.
At a national level.
We'd like it recognized
that volunteer centers are an integral part of a volunteer
or a, a response to emergency management.
And that the recognition of the local knowledge
and the local relationships that are,
are present within the communities are a vital part
of the success of having the community ready,
respond, and also recover from events.
Currently, what seems to happen is that, um,
local government have put in some really good structures
around emergency management,
but when it actually comes to an emergency,
local government staff, uh, removed from their
usual positions around infrastructure, et cetera,
and, um, take on roles like volunteer coordination, which
really is volunteer centers, day-to-day bread and butter.
Um, so why, when a situation's under stress would you, um,
bring in someone that doesn't do it on an everyday basis?
And we'd like that recognized a little more in the bill
that there is already existing local, regional,
and national structures through volunteer centers
and volunteer center network who can actually do this
and do it on a day-to-day basis.
And that should be recognized when it comes
to emergency management readiness, response and recovery.
And we'd really like that recognized in the bill
that the volunteer centers are there doing
it on a day-to-day basis.
So just step them up when it happens,
rather than bring in someone
that doesn't do it on a day-to-day basis.
Thank you for that. I appreciate the, the opportunity
to speak with you, and I'm happy
to take any questions that you may have.
Thank you. We do have a bit of time, um,
for questions if members have any.
Uh, and I just wanted to acknowledge, uh, the work
that volunteers do play in emergency situations.
And so I just wanted to make
sure that that was acknowledged.
Um, as part of our process, I know that volunteers provide,
um, so much support and we just couldn't
respond to emergencies without them.
So thank you so much for highlighting that.
I do have a question from Melissa Lee,
Uh, thank you so much.
I echo the chairs, uh, thanks to all of the volunteers.
You talked about the 16, uh, organization,
volunteer organizations around the motto.
Uh, what specific ones do you actually have in Auckland?
Um, the reason I ask that is
that when the Auckland anniversary floods actually happened,
uh, struggled with, um, um, coordinating, uh,
a lot of the response to people who had actually, uh,
their homes were flooded and they had nowhere to go.
And it was actually the local school principal
who actually opened one, you know,
the school around my area.
And effectively, you know,
there were hodgepodge of volunteers.
There was no organization.
So I'm just trying to, um, understand
how it actually all happens for your organization.
So when we talk about the 16 plus fat volunteer Central,
there's actually 17 volunteer centers around the country.
The only areas that aren't covered are the west coast
of the South Island Rupe who,
and RA at this stage, the, um,
essential part of a volunteer center is to work
with their local, local community
and their local organizations around emergency management.
If they're not engaged in that preparation prior
to an event occurring, then they're not seen
as a go-to point to assist with the community response.
I'm aware with the Auckland situation that, um,
volunteering Auckland, which is one of the centers, uh,
had made themselves available
to assist in volunteer coordination.
However, the structure at that point in time did not engage
with them to assist with that.
And that's what we are hoping as a result of this, um,
opportunity for, uh, greater local representation
in emergency management committees will resolve.
So there is that understanding relationship agreement
and response prior to it being required.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you so much, Kate.
We really appreciate you joining us today,
and thanks for all the work that you, um,
and your fellow volunteers do in, in New Zealand.
Thank you. Thank
You, Kira. Thank you
so much. We have our next, uh,
submitter here now too,
representing the Y Market District council.
Uh, we've got Dan, welcome.
Good morning. I should also have, uh,
Alan Gueler with me as well.
Is that correct?
We'll just check with our, here we are.
It looks like we've got Eleanor joining us now.
Fantastic. That's great. Fantastic.
Um, we've got a copy of your written submission, Dan,
just while LAN is joining, and 10 minutes to hear from you.
So you're welcome to use that time
or leave some time for questions at the end.
Over to you,
KDA. And look. Thank
you Chair, uh, Camilla,
uh, Mike and Melissa.
And, um, obviously whomever else is, uh, here, uh,
supporting, uh, the hearing of submissions.
Uh, firstly, I just wanted to acknowledge the comment
that the last, um, submitter spoke of
that volunteers are absolutely critical.
They, they're, uh, and last week I acknowledged,
or we did as a district with, um, uh, Nima, uh,
four individuals who've given 110 years of service.
In fact, one individual for 50 years and the other 40.
Um, so, um, between them 110, which is just amazing,
we couldn't do and perform what we do without volunteers.
So I just wanted to acknowledge that.
Uh, firstly, just as an introduction, um, our district
by re is the fourth largest, um,
territorial authority in the South Island.
Uh, we're located 20 minutes north of Christchurch
and sheer boundaries with the city, Selma
and, uh, Nui districts.
Our district ranges from urban townships such as
and CAO to the remote high country farms in the Lees Valley.
60% of our residents live in the district's four
largest towns.
There are six and a half thousand rural residential
lifestyle blocks in the district.
And I do want to come to that as part of my submission.
The district is fast growing between, uh, 96 to 2020.
Our populations raced from around 33,000
to now around 74.
Um, in my time as an elected member came in, in 2004,
uh, 22 years, we've doubled in size
and we're expected to reach, um, over a hundred thousand,
uh, in the next, uh, 15 to 20 years.
So our council's position is
that we support the overall intent
of the emergency management bill.
Number two, uh, sharing in the goal of more resilient,
coordinated emergency management system.
Um, we strongly support an emergency management system
that uplifts the value of local knowledge critically
and flexibility in both response and recovery.
We have some concerns
that the bill could constrain local solutions
by centralizing rule setting,
and we've outlined that in our, our main submission.
Whilst we agree that standardization is beneficial,
local nuances must be considered.
And I just wanna stress, like a lot of councils,
we've got a lot of experience in this area.
We have regular events, uh, unfortunately,
and we have to stand up our EOC regularly.
So we, we do get this, uh,
and what is, uh, having to put it into operation.
And we would just like to stress
that localism is absolutely critical, uh,
for an effective response.
We note that this bill could have significant financial
implications for councils as well,
particularly the time when rates caps are
also being proposed.
The bill, uh, should place greater emphasis on risk, um,
reduction, recognizing that early investment is most, uh,
is more cost effective.
Uh, over time. The regulatory impact statement notes
that every dollar spent on disaster preparedness
saves at least $4 in response in recovery later.
There needs to be clear co-funding arrangements
that are dedicated emergency management capability grant
to alleviate the pressures of fund of, uh,
unfunded mandates on councils.
This is where we need a really serious conversation about
funding an emergency levy, like funded, like
what EQC undertakes, for example, should be explored so
that there is a much more, um, secure funding, uh,
in place than the now basis in which it is funded.
And the regularity of events is happening all the time.
So we must, we've really gotta turn our mind to
that very seriously, because our councils are all facing
significant costs.
Like the last event we had last year was about a million
dollars of unexpected unbudgeted expenditure.
We just can't all carry on like that.
And then try and keep our rates at a level
that we all would like to see them be.
The council notes that
after, um, adverse weather events,
lifestyle block owners often fall between urban
and, uh, urban, uh, sorry, urban
and rural emergency management systems.
Many are, are not eligible for MPI, um, recovery assistance,
which can leave them facing significant out of cost, out
of pocket costs for re fencing, stop feed,
uh, in veterinary care.
We raised this issue previously,
and we just ask it
to be considered in designing the new
emergency management system.
We want to see a system that's fit for purpose,
and that covers everyone.
Um, and including the changes that occur in all that areas
through growth and other things,
which have happened over many years.
But this is a real issue that my district,
and not only my district, others do face.
So I just wanted to just stress that here today,
we do agree with the intent of the review
and the need to address past system failures,
but feel there are gaps which remain unaddressed.
Most notably, the vote bill isn't clear enough about NE's
role in making the emergency management system work
smoothly across different agencies.
It would help if NEMA had explicit responsibilities
to develop national tools, systems, and the clear Roles
and responsibilities framework, uh, covering the
before hours to make sure coordination
practice is more effective, the scale
and pace of the current suite of reforms needs
that councils need time to with adequate resourcing
to implement changes.
Well, and we are asking for a staged, um, uh, start
to these reforms, clear guidance on what is required
and adequate resourcing
so councils can properly assess costs, capability
and compliance impacts before changes, um, take effect.
In conclusion, our recommendations to the select committee,
uh, are this, are these, uh, um, four, uh,
several bullet points.
In principle, we support the bill with some reservations
as highlighted in our written submission.
We strongly support a strengthened emergency management
system, but believe the system must be locally informed,
adequately funded, clear in roles and responsibilities,
and aligned with concurrent reforms in
order to be successful.
We request that the committee do consider the impacts
of not supporting local go, uh, the impacts
of not considering the cost to local government
with the 82.8 million required to implement the bill
as per the regulatory impact statement without support,
this does add significant, um, cost, which, um,
we would have to absorb
and again, becomes another unfunded mandate.
As I mentioned before, we each the committee
to retain New Zealand's locally lead approach
to emergency management by ensuring a space
for local important, the development
of national rules and standards.
We also urge that the committee ensure development
of clear guidelines so
that the proposed any proposed changes
can be implemented efficiently and effectively in practice.
We suggest that the committee consider the impacts
of the broader reform program on the ability
of this board bill to support a more cost effective approach
to risk management for our communities, as opposed
to funding increased costs post event.
That's the point I was mentioning earlier.
We thank, um, the committee for their time
and the opportunity to speak today.
And between myself
and Alan, I were more than happy to answer any questions.
All the tough questions go down.
Thank you Mayor Gordon.
Really appreciate, um, the submission
and the detailed recommendations as well.
Uh, I just had one question you suggested in your written
submission and affordability principle
that allowed the sharing of costs.
And I just wanted to know, was that something that you
imagined that could be incorporated into this bill?
Something we, and I mentioned it again around the, um, uh,
what we call the emergency fund
or how we do fund these events
because at the moment we're, we're aligned on
subsidies potentially eroding,
and maybe at a higher level if, if, if we are successful,
uh, the, the, you know, the, the goodwill of the minister.
And I, I just wanna acknowledge
that I do think we have a very good minister in place now.
Uh, he's excellent.
But, um, you know, when I say to goodwill of the minister
where there are, uh, costs there, we may get a grant, uh,
that might top our mayoral relief funds up to,
to be directly supporting people.
There's a lot of costs that just aren't met.
Um, and we end up, um, funding those through, uh,
effectively through rate payers.
There's a limit, uh, there
of affordability when we're all under the pressure of trying
to keep our rates to a, a, an affordable level.
But these weather events are coming thick and vast.
Um, so we're just suggesting that it really does need
to be better considered better planning so
that we've got a better system in place
to respond effectively for our communities.
And, and if we to go under a rates, um,
and range of views around rates gaping.
Um, but if we were to go into that regime, you know,
effectively, um, we wouldn't be able
to fund the mitigation works that are essential.
Uh, and that's what I said
before, the estimate is
for every dollar we spend now would say $4 at the time
of the on an event.
And they're just points that really do need to be
seriously considered, especially when, uh,
we face the realities of dealing
with these events, uh, regularly.
They're not happening every, there's one in 501 in 200,
one in 100 year events are happening most years, um,
to my colleagues, Tara and others, uh, that way.
Uh, Christchurch just this last week.
It's, it's a significant cha challenge for all of us.
And, uh, but we're up for that conversation
and we wanted to highlight it today.
'cause I think it's, it's something if we don't highlight,
um, although the local government New Zealand submission
has, uh, then we, we missed the opportunity
to have this discussion a bit more fully.
Mm, thank you.
We are almost outta time,
but I see we've got some more questions for members.
Mike Davidson.
Thanks, Dan, for your submission.
I'm just wondering, like, do, do you believe that,
I guess the lessons that are learned during these,
these emergency events, um, are captured
and then gets passed on to other councils,
organizations across the whole of New Zealand.
Does the bill, I guess,
and ensure that this happens in your view?
Well, well, I'd like to think so, Mike,
because if we are making changes, we have to learn,
like every time we have events, we learn, um,
and we have a debrief with our teams that are on
and stood up through that time
because there's always learnings
and how we can do things better.
And that's the effective communication that comes about.
So, uh, look, I, I don't have a specific view on that,
but it's perhaps something you might wanna just test
to make sure it's adequate, um, as you are considering that.
Look, I, I just wanna shout out to Nima.
I think they were, uh,
the tools in which we've had from my very first event
to the last, they have really stepped up
and do offer great support to mes
and decision makers as to whether
or not we will need to declare an emergency.
It's a really good tool, um, that they've taken us through
as we are making that consideration.
And obviously, we're never going as a decision maker,
I'm never gonna go against, um, their advice, um, um,
because it, that's what we've got it there for.
But it's, it's critical that they make sure
that your head's in the right space, space
and looking at it through the right framework
of what's best for your community.
And we've seen that happen just locally in Christchurch
and others where states of emergency have been declared
very quickly in order that those tools are there.
And so that it brings that heightened awareness, uh,
for communities of what's going on.
Thank you. Uh, I just think we might have run out
of time now for, um, a final question,
but, uh, thank you so much for joining us.
Uh, me, mayor Gordon, and also Elena.
Thank you so much, uh,
for your submission and for joining us today.
Thank you for your time. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Uh,
we now have our next submitter, Kay Jones.
Thank you, um, for being ready, uh, to speak with us. Kay.
We, um, have a copy
of your written submission in just
five minutes to hear from you.
So I think we've got you unmuted now. We can't, uh, see you.
Oh, there you are. There you are again. Nice to see you.
Kay. Uh, over to you,
Kira. Now I put
in a supplementary submission as well, which may
or may not have come through to, to the systems, um,
but I'm, I'm sure
that you'll all be busy reading sort of later on.
So I just wanted to start by, um,
Kay Jones based in Wellington to Nuia Arter.
Um, and I've been an active volunteer in disaster readiness
since my days training at university with Red Cross
and Disaster Relief.
And now I'm more in the community management side of things,
and I want to tar Toko a lot of the previous submitters,
especially on issues like being aware of
who is in the community and their needs
and issues like communications.
So in my, um, first submission I pointed out
that we're about to lose the 3G telephone networks,
and there's not been adequate testing to see whether
or not people will be able to receive messages.
I have a phone that is likely to die.
I do not receive disaster alert, um,
warnings about incoming, um,
disa disasters even on a test basis.
So I'm wanting to see whether it's done
through this legislation
or the follow up actions, some way of using the information
to actually test and make sure that we are ready,
because it's not just about she'll be right
and we'll wait and see if it happens.
It's actually being able to engage
with the Kiwi can do attitudes
and get people to help themselves and to help each other.
So when Melissa raised the issues of trying to
find volunteer coordinators in Auckland, part of
that is you can't leave it to the last minute.
A lot of emergency management preparedness
is actually community engagement.
Those things that were previously covered
by the local government act under the wellbeings
that have recently been removed are about trying to ensure
that communities can be part
of finding solutions and working together.
And that is an ongoing relationship, um, management area
that people will do it anyway.
But this bill, while it's got a lot
of really good theoretical process, um, steps in, it
does not take the background step of saying
who can be doing things?
Who do we need to co-design with?
Where is the recognition of the role that Maori have played
that Mariah are taking when it comes to natural disasters
that things like the student volunteer army,
which sprung up from individual volunteering efforts
and then got organized there aren't in this bill
Strong ways of actually enabling those
areas of insight to be part of finding good solutions.
Um, I heard Reverend Stephen King
of the inner city Wellington group raising issues about
apartment buildings that people will not be able to live in,
experts in living rough.
Those people who are deemed homeless, who are about
to be moved on if the government has its way.
These are actually people with expertise in
what those challenges are.
We should be learning from them
and including them in this whole discussion of
how do we manage disasters?
And of course, we've got other disasters gonna be kidding
us, like the next pandemic we had COVID,
but that's not gonna be the last one.
And, you know, reflecting back on what has happened,
going back to the 1918 influenza epidemic, communities had
to come up with ways of signaling need for assistance,
a tea detail out the front, um, door to say we needed food,
but we're sick, so don't come in.
Um, I'll actually knocked, other than one point,
which is the difficulty with subpart four of the, um,
act about compensation that only refers to person's
personal property, not to collectively held property like
that of marai means that there is a barrier for any re, um,
pence or enabling khar to actually help those, um, groups,
whether it's community groups
or marai, to actually be able to not be out of pocket
and not be able to, unable to help for the next disaster.
I'm gonna stop there and see if there's any questions.
Thank you so much. Kay. We have almost run outta time,
but I just wanted to ask a quick question on the, um,
recommendation that you have around, um,
mayors not leading the response,
and we actually had, I think, a previous submission where,
um, there was a suggestion
that chief executives shouldn't be controllers.
And so I just wondered if you could
just briefly respond to that. Well,
Two parts to it. One
is that regional, um, councils,
and of course Auckland is a unitary authority,
so there may be things, um, there,
they're the ones who've got much greater knowledge of the
resource systems, whether it comes to waterways,
all the rest of it, and they've got bigger, um, copa.
So I'm suggesting it be at regional council level rather
than territorial.
And of course we do, unfortunately, since mayors are elected
separately, there's sometimes politicization
that a mere may not be fully, um,
um, the best person to make that, that call and decisions.
Um, uh, you know, there's the examples there.
So it's a bit of a toss up, whether it's a chief executive.
I think the elected person does have a responsibility,
but I would refer it to be the chair of the regional, um,
councils to be able to be in that position.
But also when you've got the mayors, um,
the land transport committee with all the rest of it,
you know, there are representatives
there who can be in touch.
So yes, a regional council to a mayor to sort of
however the communications work,
but again, this is an area that needs to be worked through
with enabling legislation.
And it may be that the best person
to make the call should not be an office
that might be designated in the law if
that person can't be reached.
It's, it's that whole thing of like, who's going
to be in the position to do it.
Maybe there needs to be a shared responsibility
that could be any one
of like check signatories in the old days.
Yeah. You know, like if you're on a committee, um, any one
of, of any two of five people could sign it.
It needs to be something that doesn't break down if
that one person is locked in a building
that can't get to a phone. Yeah,
That's a very good point. Thank
you so much for that. Kay.
We have run out of time now,
but thanks for your written
submission and for joining us today.
We really appreciate it. Thank you. Okay,
Thank you.
Bye. Uh,
now we have our next submitter already joining us.
We've got John Murphy from Amateur Radio joining us,
and we've got a written submission from you
in 10 minutes to hear from you.
So over to you, John.
Uh, good morning. Yes, my name's John Murphy.
I'm the CEO of Amateur Radio
emergency communications or a REC.
Um, and I thank you for the opportunity
to speak to you today.
A REC was formed out of the 1931 nap earthquake
where amateur radio operators stepped in
to provide communications between Napier and Wellington
after other forms of communications had failed
over the past 95 years.
A OC is, is a volunteer organization, has continued
to support communications for police search
and rescue operations, uh,
civil defense emergency incidents, um,
and we also provide communications
for community events nationwide.
We operate with a, uh, a national office of, uh, 42 groups,
which are spread from Northland through the bluff with
around 500 trained volunteers.
Um, these a EC volunteers can be further supported
by the wider amateur radio community.
Um, the a EC groups provide both volunteer operators as well
as communications equipment, established infrastructure
and portable deployable infrastructure, um, and
therefore provide alternate assistance can operate when
normal networks fail.
We want to emphasize the importance, um, as a number
of other submissions of the role of volunteers
and being able to provide the surge capacity needed in
emergency events, both in the response
but also the recovery stage.
But we see there's, there's some cr crucial differences
with, one is that, uh, there are self activated volunteers
who respond spontaneously in emergency event.
Um, then we have the, the organized
and trade trained equip volunteers like a RAC, um,
who should be embedded in the sort of planning readiness
and preparation response stages.
Um, A RAC volunteers regularly train
and exercise along some civil defense groups in the country,
but this is inconsistently applied.
Um, a key strength of a RC is the ability
with amateur radio systems to augment, uh, business
as usual, BAU communication systems like your,
your mobile phone network, your internet,
and more recently starlink services.
And, and what we term as a, a PACE communications model.
So a primary alternative contingent
and emergency, um, communication channels.
While the business as usual forms of community,
it may be the primary means
of communication A REC can offer alternative emergency
communication means should these normal networks fail.
Um, at the core of our solution, we ask
that the bill recognize the unique role
of trained emergency communication volunteers, um,
supports the integration
of a amateur radio capability into a pace
based emergency planning.
Um, ensure that New Zealand re
retained resilient people centered communication capability
where and when it's needed.
Um, that's very quickly, um,
I'll open it up to, to questions.
Thank you so much, John.
I'm sure that, um, members might have some questions.
I just had a, a question in relation to, um,
providing additional capability.
What specifically in the bill could we do to, um,
uh, recognize
and improve, um, the volunteer emergency communications
as a critical capability?
Well, I mean, I'll take the example of, um,
Titi just recently, um, Gisborne where we,
our people were in the EOC there with civil defense.
We were manning the radio communications there, um,
and being able to keep contact
with all the outlying community groups on the East Cape.
Um, so a lot of that is, is done with the existing sort
of radio infrastructure that's been put in place,
but we can also provide amateur radio communications, um,
where we have our own radio networks, our own, um,
communication channels, um,
and we're able to, one, use that for command
and control, um, getting, uh, tasking out to, to,
to, uh, locations.
But it's also a means to bring in, um, sort
of intelligence situ situation reports from the community
back into the eoc.
Thank you so much. Um, I'm just checking.
I don't think members have any other questions.
It's obviously been really clear.
Uh, so thank you so much for the work that you do
and also, uh, this really, really agree with you,
really important function within emergency.
So we'll definitely put those points to officials
after these submissions today.
So thank you so much, John. Thank
You. Thank you very much.
Thank you for being with us. Thank you.
And now welcome our next submission, uh, submitter.
Uh, we've got and we've got, uh,
re joining us ke, uh,
and sorry.
And, um, we've got 10 minutes, uh, to hear from you.
We've got a copy of your, um,
written submission. So over to you.
Ah, um, thank you for the opportunity, uh,
to present on this, uh, very important bill.
Um, I'm sure as you can appreciate, uh, our iwi, uh, in the,
in the transition to recovery at the moment, uh,
having the last month spent, um, uh, responding
to severe weather, that has largely been an
experience since, and we would say since Cyclone Ebola 1988.
Uh, so if you can imagine the context, uh,
that we are living in, we have hopes and dreams
and aspirations and constantly being in a recovery context,
um, is we just, um, urge you to think about the context
that we bring, uh, to the, to this bill.
Um, uh, just a big disclaimer as well.
Uh, Nui does not, uh, seek to speak on behalf of our hapu.
Uh, they, uh,
but they are obviously very focused on recovery at the
moment, uh, just coming out of re out of response,
um, lately.
So, um, uh,
does support the views of Hapu.
If at some sometime the select committee, uh, would like
to seek even even written feedback from those hapu.
Um, they've obviously been been a bit busy.
So, um, uh, I will take our submission as read and,
and of course we were preparing our submission in the
context of, uh,
being in a recovery still not fully recovered from
Cyclone Gabriel as well.
So there are, there are lots of learnings that we want
to bring to the select committee's, um, attention.
Um, so we, we partially support the bill.
Um, we think, uh, particularly from
perspective, we are a, we are really aware
of this government's intent to uphold, uh,
our treaty settlement.
So the that is, is largely, uh,
held by Asbo landowners.
Uh, I think, um,
the context is we have a unitary authority,
and it's like when we are in emergency management, um,
it would be like running a response in ANA from
Auckland or the other way around.
Uh, so everything is led outta Gisbon
and like what we saw last month, it is three hours away
and, um, au our hapu
and our Maori are the first responders in any event.
So to have it kind of centralized
and led out of, if I, I like to use the Auckland example
because that is kind of the dynamic that,
that we are operating under.
Um, so we partially support it, um,
around the strengthening the role
of communities in Iwi Maori in emergency management.
It just doesn't go go far enough for us to be able
to lead our own response and recovery.
And there's a large case to, um,
support a bespoke solution, particularly for, given our,
our experience since bola and these reoccurring events.
Uh, alternatively the select committee could go,
if we could solve these solutions for you,
could probably solve them for the rest of the country.
Um, secondly, uh, the emergency,
the emergency at the moment, we are starting to partner
with council, uh,
but lots of things inhibit our ability to do that.
Um, so the learnings from the, the group
recovery manager role that I,
that I appreciate this bill is trying to address, um,
doesn't quite, you know,
we are living in a recovery right now
and it's, it's just not working.
They're, they're committed to their statutory role.
We are seeking kind of the support
to having Iwi led recovery.
They're supportive and principle,
but the legislation just doesn't enable it.
Um, so to address some of the issues, uh, in our submission,
uh, we've identified, um, the following kind of challenges,
um, and you would've seen on this coordinating executive,
um, uh, function.
Um, we've, we've suggested seven, seven members,
the way our settlement is, is divided up.
Um, if you haven't been to as pro yet,
the context is the size of
as pro is the size of the Auckland region.
So if you think all the way up to Kaipara, all the way down
to that is the size of our tribal area,
our settlement is broken up into seven L Hanga.
So the seven, uh, we think could,
because we've got a unit three authority could easily
fulfill the function of
what you'd probably provide territorial authorities,
you know, who would likely be members in that group.
Um, so the, um,
and we're completely aware of what co-governance suggests
and not, we we're actually not asking for co-governance.
We're asking to be able to lead our own responses and,
and recovery in our region, um, as we're fully aware due
to our isolation, uh, us being dependent on others to kind
of help us, just, just makes us more vulnerable.
Um, secondly, um, needs
to be enabled to appoint two representatives on the
emergency management committee or require a subcommittee
or so there, there needs
to probably be changes in the legislation,
and this is the bespoke nature for a region like ours that,
that, that, um, management committee can delegate
to a subcommittee to support a context, context like ours.
So we are, we're trying to be helpful with solutions
that you could potentially, um, explore.
Um, but I guess as well we're also really aware that the,
um, the opportunity, opportunity to kind
of delegate full resourcing
and transfer of kind of powers isn't, isn't an aspiration
of, of this government.
So, um, how we, how we work through those solutions,
we're happy to keep, keep, keep talking as well.
Um, I think as well just that, um, we recognize
that there should be engagement, but it needs to be early
and needs to be sustained.
We need to be able to shape those
emergency management plans.
Um, uh, I've had a lot of experience either
with a council hat or a government hat
and now a iwi hat around how recovery has happened in
in those, um, you just can't get that buy-in
for the development and management plans on
a voluntary basis.
We are only learning through the events that happen during.
So it's, um, the resourcing
and the specific provision to enable the development
of those management plans, uh, as opposed to
having a council leader all, um, has proved challenging.
And those management plans don't cover everything when
they're, again, led from out of Gisborne that need
to provide real impact at the time of an event.
Um, uh,
and my next point was around, um, Marai, hapu
and Iwi, uh, need to be added to the list of parties
that can be reimbursed, um, in the context of
I keep going from bola, cycl, Ebola, um, you may know of,
of the economic status of our area.
We all volunteer in m anyway, we are that kind of community.
But the, um, to have parties reimbursed
for fulfilling a function, uh,
and others that don't, um, when when it's in a largely
as pro community, it is all hapu, hapu led.
Uh, that is actually a tangible issue,
uh, for as pro.
So we are basically kind of,
you're saying here in this legislation, we'll be left
to our own devices, which we are, we are generally okay
with, but if you are resourcing some parties
when we are doing the heavy lifting, um, I think there's,
there's a really unfair issue there,
um, that you need to address.
Um, and in terms of the, the
external, um, the opportunity to audit, uh, we've,
in our submission we've given examples where we think some
of those powers have been, um,
potentially tested to the full extent.
So, um, somebody independent who audits the use
of those powers and we're,
and we are in II's perspective, is sought in
that audit function.
Um, would be really, really helpful.
Uh, notwithstanding I do think, uh, lots
of active monitoring around this, um, needs,
needs to happen.
Um, and of course, uh, is,
um, an iwi of, um,
we had normally aligned with the crown.
Uh, we have many, many descendants of signatories to,
so the absence of a treaty clause, uh, we would see
as contradictory to our settlement.
Um, and then I think it's the, um,
I'm not sure how we do this without considering
and not focusing it on risk reduction
and readiness functions for, it's the only way to kind
of move forward around those elements.
So I thought I had five minutes,
so I was really pleased to hear.
Yeah, I saw that. So he actually,
Actually went for, um, just, sorry, all pre groups.
We, um, we give you longer.
So I guess thought that might be a error on our part.
So gave you 10, um, and I think we almost used all of them,
but, um, we do have a question from Mike Davidson.
So Kda Kda, thank thanks for your submission.
And obviously we know how important Mariah is during these,
you know, extreme weather events.
And, and it's not just for, uh, whanau, it's
for actually the whole wider community.
Do you have any idea, I guess that the, the cost to the ang
for all your, um, I guess your response
work in these events?
Uh, we've, we are pull, we're pulling that together.
Um, but I would say it's in the hundreds of thousands, um,
at this point and kind of daily.
So, um, so my role is, I think that it's, we're trying
to quantify the so has,
its BAU, uh, resourcing that is
actively kind of put towards that.
Uh, all of the work that the has been doing, uh,
is largely being funded out of our settlement funds,
which is not what it's for is to grow our hopes
and dreams and aspirations.
So I can get that number for you.
We are actively working on that at the moment,
so if I can send that through the,
through the clerk, I'd be happy to.
Thank you so much. Uh, Katea, we have, uh, run out
of time now, but really appreciate that
and the, um, suggest detailed suggestions you made in,
in your, um, uh, written submission as well.
And I have visited, um, some of the, uh, areas of Nati Perot
that, um, after cycling Gabriel, not
after this most recent event,
and, um, could see the contribution there.
So thank you for all of that work,
Kilda, right.
We now have our next submitters here, uh, Canterbury, uh,
see, and Canterbury mural four.
And we've got, uh, James Thompson there.
And you might have a team of people around you. James,
I've got, I've got John, the counselor F Environment.
Fantastic. Andrew, who's our deputy chair,
and he's going to do our submission.
Oh, fantastic. Well, welcome John.
Uh, we've got 10 minutes to hear from you
and we do have a copy of your
written submission. So over to you.
Thank you very much. And, uh, I speak on behalf of Chair,
uh, Mary Black, uh, Murray Black,
who is not able to be with us today.
Uh, this submission has been put together by, uh,
emergency management offices, regional staff,
and contributions from our, from our governors
and essentially the Merrill Forum.
Um, we absolutely support, uh, the, the intent of the bill
to, to take us forward and modernize emergency management,
but in a sense, believe it's not quite as transformational
as, as we would like to see, um,
without funding to support our local government,
uh, obligations.
We, we believe we are going to struggle
and potentially see different outcomes across the country.
Uh, those that have, uh, good funding
and ability, I suspect we'll be able
to do a lot more than some of those
that are more financially challenged
and coming out of, uh, smaller constituencies.
And we have a question around the roles
and responsibilities across the levels of, uh, controller,
national, regional district, local,
and equally within the, the recovery space.
So we'd like to see a little more consistency, uh,
in the wording and the bill as defining their roles
and opportunities to, to provide clarity.
And we just need to really ensure that, uh, the bill is, uh,
is meaningful and it's place based
and it's engagement and collaboration.
And, uh, another point, um, recovery.
We, we strongly believe
that recovery starts in the planning phase before any event.
It, it, it begins to work as an event unfolds.
We work through transition,
but at this point in time, we have a concern
that there are not clear gateways pathways questions
for the trans move from the transition into,
into a constant state down the line.
So we would like to see some guidance about what
that transition and gateways look like.
Is it a transfer immediately to territorial authorities,
which in probably, it probably should be,
but equally there are probably times when NZTA or
or other lead agencies might be the appropriate place.
So just having some clear questions, uh, to help
that transition
or the ability to extend that transition at times to,
to have a seamless transition.
We, we use that word a lot, uh, through the process.
And our last significant point here is around schedule three
and the infrastructure, particularly
for US Rivers infrastructure
and the like monitoring, um, ensuring that, uh,
that is brought into the conversation.
It's all about preparedness and,
and the resilience of, of our catchments and, and Canterbury
and other areas of Christ, uh, New Zealand.
Equally, uh, we have other matters,
but that sits within our, um, submission role of Iwi Maori.
Uh, we have, uh, iwi Maori sitting at our keg
and, uh, group committee
and believe they should be there as per right.
And with, with full voting, uh, capabilities.
And the last point we would just really like to touch on is
how this all fits together with the wider suite of,
of changes that are happening, uh, within central government
of how things move, uh,
conversations within this bill talking about regional
councils and responsibilities when regional councils may not
exist somewhere in the near future.
So just how that's balanced out in the bill
and opportunity without requiring significant change into
the future if we have mandated in one bill, but,
but seeing change happening in another.
And just, uh, a little bit of a conversation
around the relationship between lead agencies
and our regional controllers who takes the responsibility,
what do those transitions look like?
I will stop there. Uh, I know it's been a brief run through,
but it's very similar to the Canterbury Regional Council
submission and, uh, give opportunity for questions.
Thank you so much for that. I really appreciate that.
And we have all got a copy
of your written submission as well.
We've got a question from Mike Davidson.
Uh, thanks for your submission.
I'm just wondering, do you think the bill was strong enough
in the risk reduction, um, aspect and act?
And then with that, do you think there should be a shared
responsibility between local
and central government to fund actually the, the cost of,
um, risk reduction?
So when you look at Canterbury, like some of the rivers
and stock banks, et cetera,
I, I would suggest we do, uh, we have, um,
build back which sits within civil defense,
but can we build back better so we can replace life
with like, so I think within that context,
at times we would like to build back better given, uh,
the change in environment
of land development, a whole bunch of things.
Uh, beyond the deluge, the piece
of work done on river management, um,
I think we identified something like 180 million,
$200 million worth of, of monies that has no longer put in
by central government post the,
the change from catchment boards to regional councils, um,
and RMA reform.
So I think there is a responsibility for the greater good
for some of that work, particularly
around rivers stop banks infrastructure
to provide, uh, resilience.
James, do you have any thoughts?
Yeah, uh, Mike, I like the idea of, you know,
being a shared responsibility
and, you know, we unfortunately still do see
developments going into places that end up being flooded
or landslide or whatever it is.
And that would be great if New Zealand could move to a space
where we're not seeing that as much
and you know, um, you know, people are safer
and we're not having to respond as often as we perhaps are.
So a, a shared, a shared model, um,
uh, probably makes sense.
And I think within the spatial plans
of the reorganization, simplification
of local government would be useful if we could get
agreement across, uh, as a regional council,
we could set a set of planning rules, um,
but at times overridden by, by territorial authorities
and others by, so by standardizing some of our planning,
clearly identifying the risk, then
I think we can reduce some of those issues as well.
Thanks. Thank you. Just maybe a, a final question from me.
We had, um, Leanne Daral, um,
make a submission earlier this morning.
I'm not sure if you heard her submission,
but she had, um, quite a few interesting suggestions.
And one of them was, uh, having an automated review
of events after they happen.
And I just wanted to just, um, check with you your,
your kind of view on that suggestion.
Uh, from our perspective, I think yes, we, we, in
that unfortunate situation, have had
so many events over the last 10 or 15 years
and a significant number of reviews.
The review isn't necessarily the important thing.
It's actually giving effect to the actions that,
that fall out of the review.
And, and I can hear Leanne in my mind going, it's not done
until we've actually given effect to the actions.
So, so yes, an automatic automated review,
but really clearly if we have shared responsibility of
how we give effect to the actions that,
that fall out of that review.
Yeah, and I think Kim, you know, some, um,
shared understanding across agencies, uh, local government
and national central government as to the way we do it.
So I think in our submission,
we suggest we adopt the Australian
Lessons Management program.
Mm-hmm. We did, NEMA did start working on
that here in New Zealand, and it sort of got trumped
by all these events going on.
But a a, a program like that would help at all levels
of providing consistent feedback
and learning, um, from responses.
And I would say it would be nice
to see it extend into recovery.
Um, I don't think we've actually done a proper recovery
review for any of the big events in New Zealand.
Um, or, or if we have a, they disappear into the ether.
So, um, re reviews of recovery are just as important
as reviews of response.
That's a really, um, really important point.
And also, yeah, just acknowledging the 15 year anniversary
since, um, earthquake and,
and, um, Christchurch and the Canterbury region.
Um, and yeah, a lot that we are still learning from,
from that event too.
So, uh, I think that's all that all our time now.
Um, so thank you so much for joining us
and we really appreciate, um,
your written submission as well.
And, uh, answers to questions today. Kda, thank you
For the opportunity.
Thank you so much. Yep.
Thank you, uh, members, we will now, um, suspend the meeting
until 1:40 PM which is when we have our next, um,
submitter arranged to attend.
So see you back here at 1:40 PM Okay.